So Damon, why don't you go ahead, introduce
yourself?
And then sir Rob, you can you can go next.
DAMON 00:43
Hi, I’m Damon Rashid.
My background is, I'm actually an economist.
So I spent the first few years of my life
working for the equivalent of the Department
of Justice over in the US, in Australia.
It's called the ACCC so, federal regulator.
But in the background, I've always had a fascination
with data, so I've been running sports betting
models, horse racing models, Greyhound models,
trying to predict the outcome in these competitive
sectors trying to get an edge over the bookies.
So, you know, my day job was working as an
economist at the regulator and by night, I
was trying to run models to beat sports betting
and racing markets.
These days, I run a data science team.
We specialize in providing machine learning
solutions, I guess, in where there's difficult
problems to solve.
We do a lot of consulting for banks, insurance,
companies, universities, road authorities.
So it's been a fascinating journey.
CRAIG 01:46
Yep, and Saurabh, why don't you go ahead?
SAURABH 01:49
Yeah, totally, so I'm a software engineer
by trade.
Back when I did my thesis, like 20, 25 years
ago, it was actually in machine learning.
And back on those days, you had to literally
hand code everything.
So I did my 70,000 lines of code to get that
model working.
Then after I did a tech startup, exited to
Telstra, which is like the equivalent of an
AT&T here in Australia, got into sales for
about a decade, got into management, was the
CEO of a publicly listed tech business.
Grew that from about 20 mil to about 100 mil
exited that about three years ago, and then
stepped in as the CEO of TrialKey about six
months ago now.
CRAIG 02:35
Okay, TrialKey is the new name for Opyl.
Is that right?
Or is Opyl the new name for TrailKey?
SAURABH 02:44
Yeah, so Opyl is the company name, and that's
what we're on the stock exchange.
So the ticker code is OPL.
The actual product that we take to market
is TrialKey.
CRAIG 02:53
I see, and Damon, you're the CTO for TrialKey.
Is that right?
DAMON 03:01
Yeah, that's right.
And we've been working on TrialKey for about
three years now and we've only just got it
to market probably in the last four weeks.
So this is the exciting period where we can
start to get some feedback about our product.
CRAIG 03:16
Yeah, do you mind starting Damon, by talking
about the sports betting, which I find fascinating?
I told you earlier, I had a turn at horse
racing prediction using a supervised learning
classifier.
What kind of models were you using?
What was the success rate?
And then how can you relate to what you're
doing a TrialKey?
DAMON 03:48
Yeah, good question.
So this is around 2005, that, started building
sports models, and mainly for US sports and
some international sports like tennis and
golf.
But we were doing National Hockey League,
NBA, you know, NFL.
So, the prediction models at that stage; there
wasn't a lot of competition.
There weren't a lot of, I guess, statisticians
modeling sports back in 2005.
So there was quite an edge over the bookmakers.
So, you could take publicly available data,
you could analyze it using pretty simple models
back in the day, like you know, traditional
linear probit or logit models.
You know, even some simple logistic regression,
provided some advantage over the market.
But as time went on more and more statisticians
came into the market, data became more readily
available, and the market became tighter and
tighter and became harder and harder to win.
So you needed more advanced models.
At that stage, you know, I had other things
on.
So, sports betting sort of took a backseat.
And then we started working on this TrialKey
product.
The way that I see it is that predicting the
outcome of clinical trials, which we'll talk
about in a second, is kind of like sports
betting 20 years ago, there aren't a lot of
people doing it at the moment.
It's a very virgin industry.
There are, you know, opportunities here.
It's brand new and that surprises me, given
the amount of money spent on clinical trials.
CRAIG 05:31
That's right.
I haven't heard anybody doing this.
I mean, Saurabh and I had a conversation earlier
about, Insilico, a company that I've had on
the podcast and that I follow somewhat.
They're focused increasing the chances of
a successful clinical trial by narrowing the
scope of small molecules that they're going
to put into trial; but I don't think they're
doing any predictions on the clinical trials
themselves.
Is there anybody doing this, that you're aware
of?
SAURABH 06:19
So there's a couple, I mean, I think Insilico
are kind of playing in this area.
But you're right, there are a lot more on
the molecule side.
There's another company that we've seen out
of Israel that are talking about doing something
but they haven't launched something to market
yet.
So I think right now, we have first mover
advantage, but it'll be like the sports betting,
in a couple of years, everybody will be doing
this.
CRAIG 06:38
Yeah, and what happens, Damon, with the sports
betting?
The odds, the more people that do it, it narrows
the odds, so the payoff of a good prediction
is fewer and farther between?
Or is there something else that flattens the
curve and makes the opportunity less attractive?
DAMON 07:06
No, I think you nailed it there.
So it's more and more people, you know, having
predictions and then moving the market, but
also, the bookmakers themselves have invested
significantly in data science capabilities.
I know one bookmaker, one of the biggest,
that has 50 data scientists working for them,
making predictions.
And also a lot of professional outfits have
what are called private data, where you have
this publicly available data but for some
sports, like tennis, and soccer, those publicly
available data sets aren't that detailed.
So they have people watching these events
and coding their own variables and at scale.
And I know, particularly in the UK, some very
successful outfits that have won literally
billions of dollars by creating their own
dataset, ignoring what's publicly available
and actually hiring resources to create their
own dataset.
CRAIG 08:10
Yeah, and Saurabh, you were talking, when
we spoke earlier, about investing in clinical
trials as an investor; I mean, investing in
these small pharma companies that are, at
very low— I don't know what the term is,
but their cost of capital is pretty high.
So you can get in fairly inexpensively and
if you predict successful technical clinical
trial, and they are successful, then the value
of the company surges.
I can see maybe that opportunity would narrow
as it did in sports betting, as this kind
of thing becomes more prevalent but the value
of predicting a successful clinical trial
to the companies remains the same, right?
I mean, if it saves them time and money if
they know which drug and which protocol is
likely to be successful.
Is that right?
SAURABH 09:32
Yeah, so, just even a bit more context, so
right now the model that we have can predict
the outcome of a clinical trial with about
90% accuracy.
So we get it right most of the time.
So if we think about the use cases, I think
totally one is on the investment side because
often, the probability of success is actually
not baked into the share price for a lot of
these public companies.
Damon and I, we’re one for one, we invest
in a company called Dimerix.
We got in at 10 to 12 cents about two months
ago.
They announced their successful trial mid
March.
Now it's about 30 cents, we've done quite
well out of that.
We probably need to do this 10 more times
just to make sure we didn't get lucky once.
But I think the fundamental theory is, for
one or two drug company, either a success
or a failure will have a dramatic impact on
their share price
SAURABH 10:26
So that's one use case.
The other use case is for the drug company
themselves.
So if they're running the trial, they might
have two or three different options that they're
doing.
So we can help them figure out what's most
likely going to succeed.
And because it's explainable AI we’ll tell
them what variables to tweak.
So for example, they might have 700 patients,
but they actually need 900 for this phase,
for this condition.
Or they might be using dosage of 25 milligrams,
but the data shows for this condition, 50
milligrams is better.
Or they might be doing a cream, but the data
says look, a nasal spray is better.
So all these kinds of nuancing things that
we tried to do, we did this similarly for
another company recently, and we kind of increased
their chance of success to about 30%.
And this is all stuff that's hidden in the
data but people don't know, because the data
set has just gotten so big over time.
CRAIG 11:16
Yeah, and let's back up a little bit.
Sorry, I jumped right in on sports betting.
So drug companies, they spend a lot of money
in hunting for pharmacologically active molecule
or compound, and then they go through various
animal trials, and then they're, at least
in the United States, I think it's three phases
of clinical trials.
That whole pipeline is very slow and very
expensive.
So you don't want to spend money on a clinical
trial and have it fail.
You want to pick your bets very carefully.
And that's what TrialKey does, right?
SAURABH 12:08
Totally.
CRAIG 12:09
I mean, that's the value proposition.
Can you tell us, what kind of data are you
using?
What kind of data do you need from companies
to reach that 90% accuracy that you're talking
about?
SAURABH 12:25
Totally, so a bit of context about how we
got the data source.
So what Damon and the guys did, they've sat
down about 400,000 clinical trials from clinicaltrials.gov.
So all this data is publicly available.
But what took the three years of effort was
to be able to scrape 700 variables off each
of those trials.
And three months goes by 500, a year goes,
probably about two or 300.
And we're adding more and more data sets from
those variables and I'm sure Damon can talk
about some of the LLMs that he’s worked
on to help do that.
But then the fundamental thesis we have is
everything about how humanity interacts with
drugs and devices, not only of therapies,
is actually known within that dataset of 400,000
trials that have existed in the world.
And all we're doing is pulling out the relevant
variables for every phase, for every condition
and just putting it together, and then using
that as a knowledge set to make future predictions.
I mean, Damon, anything that would add?
Yeah, no, that's a good summary.
So the challenge that we've found was that
the actual publicly available dataset, clinicaltrials.gov,
where most significant trials are registered,
is a really badly curated dataset.
I was gonna say more nasty things about it
but that's probably the— and the problem
is that there's no real onus for pharmaceutical
companies, drug development companies, etc,
to report into that database.
So it turns out that only about 17% of all
trials ever done, we actually know what the
outcome is that have been officially reported.
Which is, when you think about it, that's
a failure.
It's a data collection failure because, as
Saurabh said, if we know those, the results
of those trials, it can help in the development
of new drugs, new medicines, new life saving
interventions.
But because the data is so badly curated,
we've spent three years trying to fix that
problem and actually generate our own dataset
based off that initial publicly available
data.
So that's what's taking the time and part
of it is around identifying which trials actually
passed and which ones failed, but also in
the free text that's written generating a
whole stack of variables using advancements
in natural language processing.
As Saurabh mentioned, that technology just
wasn't available two or three years ago with
ChatGPT, etc.
We can extract a huge amount of data from
those clinical trials, the free text within
those clinical trials, using language models.
And I don't think anyone in the world has
ever done this before.
So we're pioneering, and the results and the
insights have been fascinating.
So when we go out and talk to people in the
industry, they're totally engaged with the
results that we're providing because they've
never seen this sort of information.
They've speculated on it, but they've never
seen it.
CRAIG 15:31
Yeah, and when you say that part of the problem
is identifying which trials are successful,
aren't trials publicly— and I mean, at least
in the United States by the FDA?
DAMON 15:47
So that's the last step in the process.
So once you've done your three phases, then
you can apply for FDA approval.
But if you never get to that stage, let's
say you have a phase two trial, and it doesn't
succeed.
There's our obligation to report but it's
not really policy, so you don't know the status
of that phase two trial.
And the trials aren't linked either, a phase
three trial, you don't know what the corresponding
phase two trial was, in the dataset.
That just doesn't exist.
And initially, we thought, if a trial wasn't
reported on, we just assumed that it must
have failed.
But that's not actually the case at all.
There's many, many trials, 1000s of trials
that actually succeeded but the data was just
never updated in the public source.
So, that made our job difficult but it was
rewarding to sort of solve that problem as
well.
CRAIG 16:41
Yeah, and a certain amount of this data that
you can get publicly I would guess, is in
tabular form already.
Is that right?
What percentage of the data comes to you structured?
And then I want to ask about how you extract
data from unstructured text.
DAMON 17:09
Yeah, so out of the 700 variables, we've got
probably about 300 are structured.
That's things like, you know, how many patients
they're looking to recruit?
Or what countries are they in and, you know,
who's involved in the trial, that sort of
information comes structured.
There's a lot of structured data, but then
the unstructured data is the fascinating data.
We're talking about things like extracting,
you know, the mechanism of action for a drug
or the actual molecules and compounds themselves,
or it might be, you know, dosage levels, or
information about the inclusion/exclusion
criteria on a clinical trial, which is, you
know, who could get selected or who can who
misses out on the trial, even the endpoints
that they're trying to reach, their primary
and secondary goals of the trial, all of this
information is free text.
The only way that you can gain insights from
that data is to take that free text, apply
a natural language processing model, and turn
it into more structured data that then you
can run through a model.
So what we've been doing is creating, you
know, the extra 400 or so variables, which
will increase significantly in the next six
months.
We've been using language models to create
those variables from the free text.
The insights from that, it's been, you know,
fascinating.
Something as simple as, once a patient is
enrolled in a trial, how many touchpoints
they have with a particular site or hospital.
That's critical information as to whether
a trial will succeed or fail and those insights
were unknown before products like TrialKey
came onto the market.
SAURABH 18:53
And that's fairly nuanced, a variable like
that.
If you're doing life saving cancer treatment,
you tend to not need to touch the patients
a lot.
But if you're doing alternative therapies,
a vitamin based observational study, you tend
to need to engage with the patients, like,
every couple of weeks.
That's the real kind of nuanced stuff that
the model has kind of picked up on.
CRAIG 19:14
Yeah.
And to extract the data, I imagine a lot of
this is at this point, is prompt engineering.
Is that right?
Where you're working with a large language
model on a block of text and you're asking
it to first of all surface all the variables
that it can find in the text, is that right?
And then you decide which of those are likely
to be important?
DAMON 19:52
Yeah, so, exactly right.
So, the prompt engineering is a massive part
of what we do.
When speaking with subject matter experts,
and they tell us what they think is important
around a trial, that enabled us to create
some prompting to try to get that information
from the unstructured data.
And then to do that on mass, like to do it
for 400,000 trials and lots of prompting as
well to extract as much information as we
can, it's a big exercise.
It takes about a month for our servers to
run through and collect that data on 400,000
trials.
And then, rather than ask assigned weights
to each of those variables that are created,
we create a model, and then the machine learning
model determines whether that variable has
any impact on the probability of success or
not.
So the machine learning model applies the
weights.
So, for a lot of the data we collected, it
had a very minimal impact but some of the
data is— those variables are incredibly
predictive.
CRAIG 20:57
And it's not to the point yet, where you can
simply ask a large language model to look
at a drug and a protocol and predict based
on the weights in its memory, whether or not
that that's likely to be successful.
I mean, you're using the large language model
to extract parameters.
And then you're putting those parameters into
a structured format and using a classifier
essentially, to decide the probability of
success.
Is that right?
DAMON 21:38
That's exactly right.
We actually did try what you just suggested
as well, just to see if the natural language
models could predict if that was the prompt.
But the predictions that they came out with,
weren’t very well correlated to our model.
So I don't think they're at that stage yet
where they can actually add value to the predictions
over and above what our model does.
I just don't think it's in its realm of capabilities
just yet, maybe one day.
CRAIG 22:13
Yeah, and then do you also, in the training
phase, do you feed post-launch data into the
models?
Because even if a clinical trial is successful,
the drug may not be successful in the marketplace.
Do you use any of that data?
DAMON 22:47
Not yet.
That's something that's on our development
horizon, and also working out the probability
of FDA approval as well there.
Those two things are in our development horizon.
We've spent most of our time, so far, predicting
phases one through three of clinical trials
and haven't looked at a lot of aftermarket
data.
But yeah, that's definitely a use case for
the future.
SAURABH 23:14
For now, we're predicting something very narrow.
We're predicting whether a trial meets its
primary endpoint, which is really, does it
answer the question that it set out to solve.
So we're not really predicting whether it's
going to make money or whether it's going
to be successful.
The other thing that we do use the predictions
for is a competitor analysis.
So remember that Dimerix trade that we told
you about, that would serve a rare kidney
disease?
So their probability of success was about
55% but they had about a dozen competitors
trying to solve the same problem.
But most of those guys had their properties
and like the teens 10, 15 20% success.
So that's why we invested in them, we saw
them as a real outlier.
Then the other part of the model predicts
is when they will succeed.
So you get a nice, almost like a Gantt chart
that says, here you, here are your competitors,
and these ones we think will succeed, and
these ones we think will fail.
So it gives you a bit of a market analysis
but it is still very, very narrow around the
primary endpoint.
CRAIG 24:11
Yeah, and in the primary endpoint, can you
explain that a little bit?
What that means?
DAMON 24:19
Yeah, so for every trial, there's a goal that
they're trying to reach.
And they're called, you know, either primary
or secondary endpoints, or hypotheses.
Often there's more than one primary endpoint
and it might be, is this drug that we're testing,
in layman's terms, does it outperform what's
currently the benchmark for this particular
condition, or it might be an equivalence test;
It might be, does it perform at least as well.
There's all sorts of, you know, different
primary endpoints and there might be secondary
endpoints as well.
So, but our model— we set a very clear target
to predict.
And that's whether a trial will meet one or
more of its primary endpoints in the phase
that it's in.
But there are other targets that our model
could look at in the future.
And we've done some experimentation around
this.
And it could be, is the trial likely to complete
on time?
Is the trial likely to reach its target level
of patience?
You know, these are important questions as
well that, you know, drug designers would
like to know from the outset, you know, like,
how realistic is it that we could get 700
patients for this condition, with this number
of sites, and this number of countries?
Or how realistic is it that we can complete
it in 12 months?
So there are other goals or targets that we
could predict but at the moment, we're focused
on whether the trial would meet its primary
endpoint in the phase of that it's in.
CRAIG 25:51
So, reaching the primary endpoint doesn’t
necessarily correlate with a successful trial?
Is that right?
DAMON 26:03
Usually, if it meets its primary endpoint,
it can progress to the next phase but there's
commercial decisions to play as well, right?
It might be, you know, whether it smashed
it out of the park, or whether it just matters
endpoint, or whether competitors have come
in while this trial has been running.
There's lots of other factors as well but
it doesn't necessarily mean that a drug is
going to go all the way through FDA approval.
It just means that it's eligible to get to
the next phase if it's met one of its primary
endpoints.
CRAIG 26:38
Right, and does next phase mean phase one
clinical trial, phase two clinical trial,
is at the phase you're talking about?
DAMON 26:48
Yeah, so phase one is usually around, you
know, is something safe to use.
And then phase two, it's more around testing
safety, but then you start to test efficacy
as well, whether it works.
And then phase three is testing whether it
works on a much larger sample of patients.
So once you progress through all those phases
successfully, then that's when you can apply
for, say FDA approval.
I've simplified that a bit, but that's generally
the journey.
CRAIG 27:20
Yeah, and right now you're offering it for
meeting the phase one endpoint?
Is that where the product stands right now?
DAMON 27:35
No, we cover all phases.
So we could help design any trial that's in
phase one, two, or three.
We cover all those phases, the predictions
are pretty accurate across those three phases.
Phase two tends to be the hardest to get a
successful trial, because that's where the
rubber hits the road and you're trying to
get efficacy for the first time, right.
So, if you're running a phase two trial, the
probability of success is usually a bit lower
than if you're trying to test safety or in
a phase three trial, to prove efficacy on
a larger sample.
CRAIG 28:11
Yeah, in your test set, as you're developing
this, this 90% accuracy, Saurabh, that you're
talking about, is that across all three phases
of clinical trials?
Have you tried predicting FDA approval?
Or do you need more data, or you've tried
and your accuracy isn't where you want it
to be yet before you start offering that?
So the accuracy between phases is pretty consistent.
Also, interestingly, for rare or novel conditions,
the model predicts well in those areas as
well.
There was some concern that, if drugs never
been tested for a particular condition, how
can a model predict success rates?
But it turns out that there's enough data
on how trials are run in generally, what are
good practices that are beneficial for rare
and novel conditions as well.
So, I actually do see that products like TrialKey
might actually lead to more rare conditions
being investigated and researched because
you can have greater confidence of the outcomes,
as a side note.
In terms of FDA approval, that's probably
one of the next models that we're going to
tackle.
We're trying to get as much data as we can
around FDA approvals.
The data sources aren't as transparent as
a clinictrials.gov where everything's registered.
So, we know what comes out the other end if
something's approved by the FDA but it's a
little bit opaque about what actually got
submitted to the FDA.
So, you can make some guesses about if something
passed the phase three, yes, it probably did
go through that process, but may have failed.
So, there's a few data challenges there but
something that we think we could get a model
for instance, in time.
CRAIG 30:31
How different does the model behave when looking
at US clinical trials, or European clinical
trials, or?
I don't know which protocol Australia follows.
Whether it's closer to Europe or the US.
Is there a difference?
Do you have to tweak the model for the regulatory
environment that it's being tested in?
DAMON 31:00
Yeah, great question, so it turns out that
there's a number of countries around the world
that have their own database where clinical
trials can get registered, but most significant
ones will be registered on the global one,
which is the American one.
In terms of the way trials are run, there's
enough consistency in the parameters between
different countries that we can match up the
dataset.
So for example, in Australia, we have a database
called the A and Z CT but it's almost identical
to the one in the US.
So we can map that data so that we can combine
those datasets, and there's other ones around
the world as well.
And they’re run reasonably consistently.
What is interesting, though, is that some
countries systematically over perform or underperform
for various conditions or phases, and that's
one of the insights from TrialKey.
If you're running a particular trial, for
a drug, and a condition, there's countries
and sites that are going to be beneficial
to be in and ones that aren't going to be
beneficial and it varies between phase and
conditions.
So that's incredible insights there where
you can significantly improve your success
rate just by knowing what jurisdictions to
go to.
And it might be something to do with patient
populations or it could be regulation.
That's the part that the model doesn't tell
us.
We need subject matter experts to help inform
us on that But it's a fascinating insight.
I know, Saurabh, you've had some examples
of that as well.
SAURABH 32:36
Yeah, so one of the companies we're doing
a bit of work with and talking to, they’re
doing a clinical trial around vitamin D supplements.
So, one of the things the model actually pulled
out is if you're going to do that in Asia,
you want to be in Indonesia.
And, probably, a reasonable question to ask—
because if you're in Australia, it's an Australian
company, obviously people from Europe came
here 20 years ago.
Europe didn't have a lot of sun, a lot of
sun in Australia.
So people in Australia tend not to have vitamin
D deficiency.
Plus we have a lifestyle, which is very outdoorsy,
very beachy, and all those kinds of things.
If you're in Indonesia, it's a heavily Islamic
country so people cover up a lot.
And people are outside less.
So they actually get a lot less sun exposure
than they do here.
I mean, equivalents in America would be, looking
at doing a vitamin D study, probably no point
doing it in Florida or on a beach but you
want to do it in Alaska.
All these things are hidden in the data, which
when you say it, oh my god, that's so obvious.
Similar for different genetic conditions,
there was a condition we were looking at,
the model predicted you want people from Switzerland
because every region has slight genetic diversity
of our heritage and evolution over time, and
different conditions, you actually want different
population sets to help you, kind of, really
declare efficacy or not.
CRAIG 33:55
That's fascinating, So this is a SaaS product.
Is that right?
And the customers go on and subscribe, I presume,
and then they go on to the platform, and then
they load their data up themselves.
Is that right?
Can you talk about how it works practically?
SAURABH 34:24
Totally, the way it works, you go on, you
sign up for a trial, then if you're happy
you continue on.
So the simple version is you have all those
trials to search for.
So you can type in a condition, cancers, most
are lung cancer, what are the trials currently
in phase three that are going to complete
and then in the next year, it gives you a
list of all those trials, and it gives you
a lot of data about them.
And it tells you why the prediction is 17%
or 72%.
And it gives you each of those 700 variables
that were meaningful, they kind of bubble
to the top.
But then let's say that you have your own
trial, we have an interface right now— it's
almost like a clinical trial simulator.
We can literally upload your protocol, we'll
grab whatever variables we can, you might
need to tweak some, adjust them.
And then you can actually simulate that trial.
What we're building now, and hopefully be
done the next couple of weeks, is almost like
a bit of a slider bar, where we'll recommend
the optimal for every variable.
But you might say, look, the model says we
need 700 patients, we can't afford it and
we can only get 300 patients based on our
budget.
So you can slide that down and we'll tell
you what the impact of that is on your probability
of success.
For the first couple, you probably need our
help, but over time, companies will just be
able to do this themselves.
CRAIG 35:34
Yeah, how many variables can you tweak?
DAMON 35:44
So yeah, I think the base model that we're
going to launch in a couple of weeks, we'll
probably have around 30 or 40, that you can
tweak.
From those variables, that's when we can create
the full 700 variables from those base 30
or 40 variables using natural language processing,
using combinations of variables.
There'll be at least 30 to 40 and they vary
from the simple stuff like choice of patients
to the actual protocol itself, inclusion/exclusion
criteria, or endpoints you're trying to meet;
things like, who you want to work with, like,
principal investigators, what sites, what
countries you want to be in, all that sort
of stuff is selectable.
That has an impact on the probability of success.
So you can imagine, you know, if you're tweaking
30 variables, there's the scope to really,
I don't want to use the word gamify but let’s
say, optimize your trial.
And often it's low hanging fruit that can
be tackled, you could change from doing open
label masking to double blind, which is a
technical thing but just by changing that,
it could significantly increase the probability
for a certain phase or condition.
And that's what our model will shed light
on.
CRAIG 37:06
How big is the market for this, do you think?
SAURABH 37:37
So, fingers crossed, it's quite big.
Because what I'm hoping will happen with a
tool like this is— right now there’s about
35,000 trials happen in the world every year
on humans.
I think what a model like this will actually
do is make it so there'll be millions of trials
that will happen in the AI world and you'll
have less trials happening in people.
So it might not be 35,000, it might be 5000.
But you'll find those trials will be, like,
overfunded and over-resourced so they can
kind of get through the game very, very quickly.
And at some point in time, it's going to be
like, Well, why would you do a trial in people,
if you haven't done it in AI first?
It will almost become like an ethical thing.
I'm sure kids are learning to drive in a decade,
like, you won't learn to drive in a car, you’ll
learn to drive in a simulator.
And once you're great at that, then they'll
let you out on the real world because it would
be so unsafe to let someone learn to drive
on the real road.
So I think this will just be a thing in five
or 10 years, every trial will happen in AI.
And once they've optimized it and figured
out which ones to back and not back.
That's what they'll do in the human population.
CRAIG 38:40
Yeah, wow, that's fascinating.
And you don't look at the molecules, do you?
SAURABH 38:52
Not yet, but we're about to start some work
there.
I mean, Damon, you can probably talk about
some of the molecule work that we're doing
right now.
DAMON 38:57
Yeah, one of the benefits of using natural
language processing models is that you can
extract the molecules, the compounds that
we used for each trial.
And then there's a separate database that
has the properties of those molecules and
compounds, and we're in the process of ingesting
that information into the model.
It's one of our next steps and that will be
very interesting to see, what sort of an impact
those properties will have on success rates.
So, my hypothesis is that they will have an
impact, but not as much as the trial design
itself.
From what I've seen so far from TrailKey is
about 60% of the world's trials are designed
poorly.
There's major design flaws in them.
So I think that there's a lot of drugs or
devices that would probably have been successful
had the trial been structured correctly.
It's not the underlying molecule or compound
that was the problem, it was the actual design
of the trial that led it to failure.
So I think hidden in the data, there would
be 1000s of these drugs, or devices that would
have shown efficacy and they’re just sitting
there orphaned at the moment.
So maybe something like TrialKey might bring
back some of those prospects and candidates
and better testing can be done.
CRAIG 40:24
Yeah, wow, that's exciting.
So the product is launching when?
SAURABH 40:34
So it launched about a month ago.
So you can go on to trialkey.ai, you can sign
up now you can get a bit of a trial.
One other point I'll make just further to
Damon's point.
So where Damon and the guys really thought,
Oh, there's something to this, was during
Covid.
So, that's when they first built the model.
There are about 800 vaccine candidates out
in the world and what the model predicted
was Pfizer and— sorry Pfizer and AstraZeneca
or Pfizer and Moderna Damon?
DAMON 41:01
Pfizer and Moderna were, I think one and three
in our predictions.
SAURABH 41:09
And that's the way the world ended up and
that's the way, you know, reality happened.
But if he knew that before the event, it's
almost like buying a lottery ticket after
it's drawn, then you would have just over
indexed your effort and resources on those
ones.
And the other 750, you might have done the
top 50 with the other 750, you just wouldn't
have done, you would have really, kind of,
pivoted your resources towards those guys.
But that was an example of something really
novel, right?
That was all around mRNA vaccines, which hadn't
really been done before, but the model still
got right, because a big part of their success
was how they designed their trials.
And some of these large farmers just have
more money, have more resources, have more
expertise to design them better.
And that's what I think will get democratize
across, you know, all pharmaceutical companies,
they'll all have access to the same level
of of insight,
DAMON 41:58
And particularly hospitals and universities,
which are systematic underperformers when
it comes to clinical trials success, the models
showed that to be a fact of the data.
So, I think products like TrialKey could lift
the standard of research in hospitals and
universities, and create a level playing field,
I suppose, so that they could compete with
the bigger end of town.
CRAIG 42:27
And I would guess it would also increase investment
for underfunded companies that have good ideas,
if they can show that the likelihood of a
trial succeeding people would be more willing
to invest.
At some point, do you think this would be
standardized so that there is a TrialKey seal
of approval or TrialKey badge or something?
Because predicting for the company is one
thing but the company being able to use that
to raise capital or whatever use they might
have beyond actually going ahead with a trial
that would be important.
SAURABH 43:17
Totally, I mean, I think what it will be—
because the real subtlety to what you said
was, I think a tool like ours would lead to
an efficient allocation of capital, where
money and resources will go to the trials,
and the drugs, and the molecules that are
most likely going to succeed.
And once that kind of gets accepted and people
see this working over time, I think you're
right.
It will flip the other way, so anyone who's
looking to seek funding will probably have
like a TrailKey rating.
A bit like you get energy ratings for appliances,
that same kind of thing.
There'll be probably a similar rating for
all trials.
And then before they go to seek funding, they'll
probably use a tool like ours to really optimize
it to maximize the chance of success.
And chance to success, it's a funny thing,
like in that rare kidney disease 54% was amazing
but in something like obesity, you really
want to be above 70% to be differentiating.
And then you can kind of use that, optimize
and it will just be a standard part of the
funding process or for one of the large pharma
it’ll probably just be a standard part of
their internal due diligence as they choose
which trials to cull and which ones to fund.
DAMON 44:23
I'm wondering Craig, whether you should join
our marketing team.
I like the TrialKey seal of approval.
I’m really warming to that.
SAURABH 44:31
I can pitch you the stack!
CRAIG 44:33
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah, well, that's amazing.
Whose idea was this?
DAMON 44:48
Well, the idea came about three years ago,
it was the then CEO of Opyl Michelle Gallagher
and I had a discussion around this market
problem.
It was one that I couldn't believe hadn't
been solved already, given it's $15 million
on average to invest in a phase two trial
for a pharmaceutical company.
I'm running sports betting models in the background
and pharmaceutical companies, and hospitals,
universities aren't using big data for clinical
trials.
It just seemed like a complete, I guess, oversight
that they weren't using machine learning and
big data to help them design trials.
So with that in mind, we set out to solve
this problem.
We were one of the first, there's been, you
know, one or two competitors and some academic
papers written but as I said before, this
is still pretty much virgin territory.
So yeah, coming from a sports betting background,
I just could not believe that this hadn't
been solved or attempted to be solved using
machine learning.
CRAIG 45:55
Yeah, and I'm interested in the investment
side, are you thinking about selling this
data to investors?
SAURABH 46:13
Yeah, totally, I mean, we haven't quite figured
out the right model, whether it's like a subscription
fee charged to investors, or whether we actually
just set up our own separate fund and use
that to invest in.
So that's why for now, I think it's just more
Damon and I doing trades on the side.
But once we kind of crack the pharmaceutical
game, I think this will be the next use case.
We might then end up bifurcating the organizations,
one's a lot more pharma focus, one's a lot
more investor focused.
CRAIG 46:41
Yeah, and as, Damon, as you were saying, you
were surprised no one's done this.
This kind of model could be applied to all
kinds of things.
Have you guys done any, or is it too early,
or do you think you will?
DAMON 47:03
No, I've looked at other areas, other applications
for this type of modeling.
One, I've just launched actually it’s called
GolfSwings.ai, which will, I don't know if
you're a golfer Craig or know any golfers,
but it can take your golf swing, just filmed
from a regular smart device, it can determine
all your movement points, and then use explainable
AI to predict what movements you can work
on to fast track your improvement, which ones
are most likely to result in a handicap reduction.
So we've only just launched that product GolfSwings.ai.
And there's other applications as well, for
digital marketing, all sorts of possibilities
in this space.
But the one— this TrialKey one that we're
talking about today, given the size of the
industry and what's at stake, this is an absolute
prime candidate for this technology.
And we're excited about
it but yeah, you're right.
There are definitely lots of use cases.
CRAIG 48:03
Yeah, and Saurabh, did you say 30,000 odd
clinical trials a year and
that could be reduced to 5000 if people knew
the likelihood of success in a trial?
And then you'd run them
in simulation before going into human trials—
that's a pretty powerful idea.
SAURABH 48:41
And just to Damon's point, I mean, basically,
what the guys have done is they've built a
generic way to solve what's actually a super
generic problem.
You got 1000 variables, an outcome, what variables
lead to that outcome, and how do you weigh
those possibilities.
And it just happens to be applied to the clinical
trials phase and that will be what we'll do
for the next couple of years till we really
run this problem down; but it's a generic
solution to an actual super generic problem.